+++
author = "Internationalist Perspective"
date = "2012-07-16T18:40:53-07:00"
issue = ["IP057"]
title = "Internationalist Perspective and the Tradition of the Communist Left "
weight = 5

+++

*This text is the first part of a draft text for discussion both within
IP and in the pro-revolutionary milieu. We anticipate that the
discussion upon which we here embark will result in the adoption of a
text at IP�s 2013 conference that will clarify the relationship of IP to
the tradition of the historical communist left. An editing error in the
article resulting in a sentence in the penultimate paragraph of this
article being printed twice. This error is corrected in the on-line
version.*

1\. When Internationalist Perspective was first published in 1985, our
group was characterized by its agreement with the basic positions of the
Communist Left, but also by its critical attitude towards this current.
�Communist Left� is a common name for the diverse collection of Marxists
groups who broke with, or were expelled from, the Bolshevik-dominated
Third International on the basis of their principled pro-revolutionary,
anti-nationalist, stance, and for the groups that later were formed on
the basis of their positions. We identified and continue to identify
with the fight they waged. We recognize that they represented real class
resistance against the counter-revolution that was ultimately victorious
in Russia and throughout the world. We recognize that they defended
class positions, while most of the so-called Marxists abandoned them.
But since our beginning we also realized that the Communist Left had
major shortcomings and theoretical �black holes� and did not provide us
with a theory adequate for our times. So we called for a �renaissance�
of Marxism. By that we meant: to refuse the stale dogmatism that came to
characterize traditional Marxism, to critically re-examine our sources,
to develop Marxist analysis where it left off, to break out of the
self-referential framework of traditional Marxism and open up to
non-Marxist thought, in order to forge a living theory, a flashlight
that helps find the way out of this dark tunnel.

We never thought that we could do this alone and therefore reached out
to others. So that is what defined IP: its Marxist, communist left
origin, its objective of a renaissance of Marxism, and its call to
others to join this project, to join us in a non-sectarian, non-dogmatic
debate that goes to the heart of the matter : how capitalism works, how
it can be ended. That call was mostly directed to others in the
Communist Left milieu and received, in most cases, a chilly response.
This did not stop us from pursuing what we set out to do. That was a
process of unravelling and reconnecting. Empirical critique of communist
left-positions � the contradiction between its theory and reality -- led
to a critique of the conceptual tools by which this theory explains
reality, which led to a critique of the very framework on which these
concepts are based, which led to a reconnection with Marx�s analysis on
a deeper level. We were not alone in this journey, although it seemed
sometimes that way. Others, often unbeknownst to us, were embarked on
similar projects. The current of the �Communizators�, in its various
expressions, and the German value-form theorists, among others, made
important contributions which impacted our own debates. Meanwhile, our
distance from the communist left tradition grew. While still sharing its
basic political positions, we realized a gap had grown between its
theoretical framework and ours. It became time to spell out that
difference, to situate ourselves clearly. This turned out to be a moving
target. We went through several drafts, as our own understanding of how
value works deepened and made us go back to the drawing board. It became
clear that the communist left�s shortcomings had a coherence which had
its source in Marxism itself, or at least in the traditional,
�orthodox,� Marxism we too once shared.

So do we still consider ourselves part of the Communist Left? Yes. We
stand on their shoulders, no question about it. We continue their fight.
And no. We have moved beyond the Communist Left. We have no alternative
moniker but �Left Communist� no longer fits well, at least not without
an explanation. The explanation is what follows.

**Understanding History**

2\. What we need is a Marxist critique of Marxism, a materialist critique
of historical materialism as developed by the theorists of the Second
International, and of �histomat,� the dogma created by the Third
International and enshrined by Stalin. [(1)](#note-1) We need to
understand Marxism as a child of its time. Indeed there is no reason why
it alone would escape the influence of the modes of thinking and social
practices of the period in which it arose; at least not from a Marxist
point of view. Influence from ideologies of Enlightenment, of Progress,
Christian Messianism, as well as the quasi-religious belief in science�s
capacity to know, explain and solve everything. Influence also from the
changing mode of production, which was transitioning to machine-based
production. With the development of mechanical technology came a
mechanistic perspective on the world, a view of reality as a complex
machinery obeying mechanical laws, an equation of progress and
technology. Also, in this period, the economy truly became the driving
force. The growth of production became the dominant social goal, shaping
ideology and social practices. This invited the belief that it always
had been that way. But the relentless focus on productivity was really a
focus on the accumulation of value, and thereby specific to the mode of
production based on the value-form.

Marxism underwent these influences. But it also reflected the struggle
of the proletariat within and against capitalism and its need to
understand, to see where it is going. Marxism never pretended to be a
neutral science, it took the position of the working class. By doing so,
blindfolds fell off, fog evaporated, reality became clearer. Not the
objective reality but the subjective reality of the value-creating class
on whose exploitation capitalism depends and which has the potential
power to end it.

3\. From the above can be concluded: Marxism is a work in progress and
the development of consciousness is a complex process that can�t be
reduced to a simple schema. But traditional Marxism drew the opposite
conclusions.

Instead of recognizing the complexity of consciousness and the role of
contingency in history, the complex interaction of diverse social
factors, economic, political, and ideological, in the historical
unfolding of social relations, traditional Marxism divides the world
into a �base� -- the productive forces, crudely understood as material
productive forces and the social relations they automatically create --
and a �superstructure� � all the rest, all manifestations of human
thought and interaction, unilaterally determined by the base. So while
traditional Marxism proclaims that class struggle is the motor of
history,[(2)](#note-2) it believes that class struggle is itself a
result of the inherent development of the productive forces. So it�s
this development that they see as the real motor of history. That makes
the question, how can consciousness develop to the point that communism
is realized, very simple. The development of the productive forces will
take care of that. The most consistent adherents of the historical
materialist dogma are the councilists, who believe that political
organization, being a �superstructural� activity, can�t have any impact
on history, since society is driven solely by �the base� which imposes
new social relations when its evolution requires them. So all we have to
do is let history take its course.

Instead of recognizing that Marxism was and is a work in progress,
traditional Marxism, under the guidance of Engels, Kautsky, Lenin and
others, became a closed, self-contained system of thought that explained
the universe and everything. They reduced Marxism to an ideology, a
pseudo-science based on the premise that the future is already contained
in the past and is therefore inevitable. That all of history happened
because it had to happen that way, that it all was preparation for the
moment that the productive forces can no longer expand within capitalism
and thus impose socialism. Such a vision of history, unfolding on the
basis of a single principle or ground, has more in common with idealist
and metaphysical philosophies, than it does with a materialism rooted in
the actual social relation of human beings, and the historical complexes
that their labor and praxis creates.

The problem begins with traditional Marxism�s epistemology, i.e. its
answer to the question, how human beings *know* the world, social and
natural. Engels, who grappled with that complex of issues in a series of
classic texts, was convinced that the *reflection* theory of
consciousness that he elaborated, guaranteed a correct cognition of the
�real world,� a position reiterated in Lenin�s own classic text,
[(3)](%3Ci%3EMaterialism%20and%20Empiriocriticism%3C/i%3E%3C/a%3E.%20What%20Engels,%20Lenin,%20and%20traditional%20Marxism%20ignored%20is%20that%20the%20human%20being%20is%20not%20%3Ci%3Eoutside%3C/i%3E%20the%20world%20that%20he/she%20cognizes,%20but%20%3Ci%3Ewithin%3C/i%3E%20that%20world,%20so%20that%20thought%20is%20no%20mere%20reflection%20of%20an%20external%20reality,%20but%20an%20active%20and%20conscious%20factor%20in%20its%20historical%20structuration%20and%20unfolding.%20In%20his%20first%20Thesis%20on%20Feuerbach%20Marx%20criticized%20this%20�objective�%20point%20of%20view%20in%20which%20�things,%20reality,%20sensuousness,%20are%20conceived%20only%20in%20the%20form%20of%20the%20%3Ci%3Eobject,%20or%20of%20contemplation%3C/i%3E,%20but%20not%20as%20%3Ci%3Esensuous%20human%20activity%3C/i%3E,%20practice,%20not%20subjectively.�%20But%20this%20approach%20shaped%20traditional%20Marxism,%20and%20passed%20into%20the%20historical%20communist%20left.%20With%20it%20came%20claims%20of%20scientific%20knowledge%20of%20past,%20present%20and%20future.%0A%0A%3Cp%3ECrude%20economic%20determinism,%20combined%20with%20Hegelian%20teleology%20in%20history,%20the%20existence%20of%20a%20general%20%3Ci%3Epurpose%3C/i%3E%20in%20history,%20a%20�final%20goal%20of%20the%20world,�%20fashioned%20traditional%20Marxism�s%20belief%20system,%20based%20on%20the%20dogma%20that%20mankind%20is%20programmed%20for%20communism,%20that%20every%20mode%20of%20production%20that%20has%20occurred%20in%20Western%20Europe%20was%20a%20necessary%20stepping%20stone%20towards%20that%20goal,%20that%20the%20driving%20force%20always%20is%20the%20growth%20of%20the%20productive%20forces,%20which%20develop%20within%20a%20given%20society%20to%20the%20highest%20point%20possible,%20and%20then%20instigate%20class%20struggle%20which%20leads%20to%20a%20new,%20more%20advanced,%20mode%20of%20production,%20and%20so%20on,%20until%20communism%20is%20reached.%20%3Ca%20href=)
4. Our critique of �historical materialism� and �histomat�is not a
rejection of materialism or of the historical dimension of social
formations. The premise remains that material conditions determine human
society and it is to those material conditions that we look in order to
see the potential for societal change. But consciousness is not a mere
superstructural reflection of the economic base, it is itself a material
force, made tangible in human praxis. Humans are social beings who,
through their interaction with nature and each other, create their own
world, make their own history. The choices they make, the beliefs they
cling to, the understanding they develop and the unpredictable
contingencies that are integral to such a complex reality, all shape
this world, just as much as the characteristics of the productive
forces. Our critique of stageist teleology does not imply a denial of
continuity between different historical periods, between different forms
of society. The reasons why a new society arises are obviously linked to
the obstacles the old society came up to, as well as to the
possibilities it created. But that doesn�t mean that everything happened
because it had to happen. That �primitive communism� had to lead to
slave society which had to lead to feudalism which had to lead to
capitalism which has to lead to communism. Different paths were taken,
in other places than Western Europe. Indeed, the appearance of
capitalism in Western Europe was itself an historical singularity, due
to a complex of contingent historical factors, political, ideological,
as well as economic.

We are not suggesting that everything happens by accident. Some things
do, of course, but there are phenomena that are predictable, if we
understand what drives them. But to reduce all of human history to a
single causal chain, as traditional Marxism�s stage-theory does, does
not withstand a materialist critique. Different causal chains produce
predictable results but intermingle in ways that makes the whole
unpredictable. Contingency shapes history as well as necessity. By
�contingent� we do not mean accidental or without cause, but rather that
the cause lays external to the phenomenon, or that a contingent
phenomenon is the result of a convergence of two or more necessary, but
unrelated events. A technological creation that is the result of a
causal chain may come into contact with a political event that is the
result of a different causal chain and merge to create a contingent
event. The contingent event is not the result of (or is not embedded in)
either of the two previous events as singular chains but only in their
convergence.

The stage-theory of traditional Marxism is essentially a reductionist
interpretation of Western European history, twisted into a universal
law. If there was such a universal law, there would be a causal unity of
all the transitions between modes of production, and social formations.
In reality, the causes are different, specific to each transition. In
regard to the future too, different paths are possible. It is true that
humankind faces the choice of �socialism or �barbarism�, but what these
broad terms in reality would mean is impossible to predict and none of
the possibilities is inevitable.

Our critique of productivism should not be interpreted as a denial of
the importance of the productive forces and the productiveness they make
possible, in shaping society and creating the conditions to change it.
But it is a rejection of traditional Marxism�s teleological narrative of
their history, and a rejection of the view that their development by
definition means progress for mankind. It is a rejection of the view
that science and technology are class-neutral and readily applicable in
a post-capitalist world. If only it were that simple. In reality, rather
than being progressive, the development of the productive forces has
sometimes, and especially in the last century when destruction became an
integral part of their growth-cycle, been regressive, creating horror
and suffering on an unprecedented scale. It is true that in this same
period they have developed conditions propitious to move to
post-capitalism, to communism. At the same time they worsened other
conditions, in the first place by what they did to our natural
environment. If mankind were to continue to let them develop in a
capitalist framework, it may very well kill itself. But it�s also true
that they have created a giant productiveness that holds the promise of
meeting the needs of all humans. They have created an incredibly
socialized, interdependent, internationalized process of production. A
process of global collaboration that has engendered the �collective
worker� whose specific conditions embody both the possibility and
necessity of revolution. They have created production that requires very
little labor time, and while this is deadly for a society that measures
wealth by labor time, it makes it possible to conceive wealth
differently, and thereby also to conceive work differently. To end
alienated, boring, degrading labor and replace it by meaningful,
creative, social activity. They have improved these and other conditions
in the last 100 years, but calling this era �progress� is like slapping
the faces of the many millions who died in wars and holocausts and of
the billions who suffered and suffer miserable lives of avoidable pain.
�Barbarism� is not something that might occur some time in the future.
There is a global holocaust going on, right now. It�s still in an early
stage. It can get much worse. But it also can be stopped. The future is
undetermined.

The problem mankind faces is not that capitalism impedes the development
of the productive forces. The problem is that it shapes this development
in a way that leads to our self-destruction. Science and technology are
not neutral, they are profoundly shaped by the value-form. It is the
logic of value which makes them so incredibly destructive and
alienating. It not only determines the purpose for which they are used
but also their content and structure. The science and technology that
has historically developed, and the instrumental reason to which it has
been yoked, cannot be separated from the compulsion to accumulate, the
subjugation of living labor to dead labor, that are the hallmarks of
capitalism. Not just the uses to which that science and technology is
put, the expansion of commodity production, but the real abstraction of
the commodity form itself, is directly linked to the separation of
intellectual and manual labor upon which capitalism is based, and to the
abstraction of pure scientific activity. Science, far from being
socially neutral, then, is itself linked to the abstraction that shapes
the process of the production and exchange of commodities. Science and
technology have become the means through which the value-form reproduces
itself, in commodities, as well as in human minds. But here too we
reject determinism and thus the idea that the human mind is simply
formatted by the technology it uses. The relation is more complex. And
science and technology are more complex too. Even though they are shaped
by the value-form, they have, like all areas of human praxis, a dynamic
of their own and thus a relative autonomy, even today. Which means that
their development contains aspects by which capitalism reinforces its
domination as well as aspects that favor the resistance to it and its
supersession. IP analysed this in some detail in regard to
information-technology. We don�t subscribe to the �tabula rasa� theory
according to which post-capitalist society would discard all existing
science and technology and start over from scratch. But we think that
science and technology would go through a revolution as well, not just
in their purpose or uses but in their very nature.

**Understanding Value**

5\. The value-form stands at the core of Marx�s understanding of
capitalism and of the possibility to supersede it. He was not the first
to see that wealth in capitalist society, while taking the form of goods
and money, is really something else: (abstract) labor time. By comparing
the average, socially necessary labor time of products, the market
organizes their exchange, and thereby also orients production. The
founders of �classical� bourgeois political economy, Adam Smith and
David Ricardo, already came to that conclusion. Marx agreed with them
but then drew out the implications: the difference between the value of
the commodity labor power and that of the commodities it produced;
surplus value, the basis of capitalist accumulation; A system of legal
robbery.

This part of Marx�s analysis was embraced by traditional Marxism. But it
reduced his value-theory to a critique of theft. Value is seen as the
real, inner substance of the commodity, part of which is stolen by the
capitalists. Socialism then, returns that stolen part to its rightful
owner, the working class. That �socialism� does not require the
abolition of wage-labor, money or capital. It merely requires that the
�representatives� of the working class (the party, the state, the
workers councils) decide how and in what forms to accumulate value
(always �for the benefit of the working class� of course). In contrast
to this critique of a particular form of ownership, Marx�s value-theory,
obscured by traditional Marxism, is a critique of ownership itself. In
contrast to traditional Marxism�s focus on the distribution of wealth,
Marx�s theory of the value-form focused on the production of wealth and
the social relations on the basis of which abstract labor could be
extorted from the collective worker.

The view of value as the real, trans-historical substance, of all
products of labor, came from Smith. Marx may have assimilated it at
first, but then developed a deeper analysis which made clear that value
became the inner substance of things only when it became the purpose of
their production. While money, private property, accumulation of
possessions and markets all existed prior to capitalism, it took the
commodification of labor power for the value-form to emerge as the
organizing principle of society and for value to become something that
(seemingly) could be, and indeed had to be, under penalty of economic
death, endlessly accumulated.

Whereas Smith saw value as a natural phenomenon, reflecting human nature
itself, for Marx, it is the historically specific product of capitalist
social relations, based on the historically specific social form of
abstract labor as the measure and essence of wealth. It�s a specific way
of looking at things and a mode of human relations that arose at a
particular time in a particular place and spread like a virus, because
of the conquering power of the productivity it engendered.

**Is it �real�?**

Things are real, people are real. The value-form reduces them to a
quantity of money, that is, a quantity of abstract labor time, but they
do have their own, objective qualities that define them, independently
from their value-form. Value is not real in that sense: no microscopic
or chemical analysis can reveal the value contained in a commodity. It
is not real in the sense of existing outside�s people�s minds, like the
sweetness of ripe fruit, or the sound of a tree falling, or the weather.
And yet it feels like the weather: it follows its own dynamic, it has
its own laws, which humans can try to manipulate but to which
ultimately, they are subjected, with no choice but to suffer its
consequences. It confronts us like an outside condition, an objective
fact, and yet it is a human creation. So we call it a �real� or
�objective abstraction.�

The reality of value lies in it being a social thing, the product of
real social relations. The commodity-form masks this. It makes it appear
as if the relation between commodities is just a relation between
things, based on their autonomous qualities. But in reality, every
commodity, being the product of labor, measured in time, labor that in
part is appropriated by capital as surplus-value, is essentially a
social relation: a relation between capital and labor, between the
capitalist and the working class. Comparing commodities is comparing the
different quantities in which this relation is embodied in products.

It�s all in our minds. Only the human mind could come up with a box like
this one: Value commodifies human relations, turns them into relations
between things, commodities. But the relations between commodities
itself is really a human relation; one that has wrought marvels and
horrors. Increasingly more of the latter. But the reason why it is so
difficult to change the human relation that is the cause of these
horrors is the belief that the value-cycle really is a relation between
things, a natural given that can�t be changed.

Marx called this �commodity-fetishism�. He wrote:

According to Isaac Rubin commodity-fetishism is the core of Marx�s
value-theory. [(5)](#note-5) We agree. All the rest, all the laws and
tendencies of capital and the contradictions it gets caught in, follow
quite logically from it. For traditional Marxism, it�s just abstract
theory. But the implications are clear. On the one hand, the world of
value is not the only possible world; it is a trap we can get out,
because we made it ourselves. On the other hand, we can�t get out of the
trap as long as �products of labor are produced as commodities�. That
means, as long as the categories abstract labor, wage labor and money
survive, the value-form will survive as well -- and reproduce itself.
Even if income is redistributed, we will still be in the trap and the
law of value will assert itself and with it, the compulsion to
accumulate, to exploit, and so on.

Marx distinguished value-wealth from �real wealth.� The former is
abstract and all about measuring things, the latter is sensuous and not
simply quantifiable. The first would evaporate if all of a sudden we
would stop believing in and reproducing it (and huge chunks of it must
evaporate regularly in economic crises for it to continue). The second
does not depend on our belief in its inner substance, it is what it is.
But in capitalism, the growth of real wealth and the forms that it
takes, are conditioned by the growth of value-wealth. The expansion of
real wealth is only a means for the expansion of value-wealth and when
it doesn�t serve that purpose, it generally does not occur. The inherent
dynamics of science and technology, even though they are shaped for the
purpose of value-expansion, also create awesome possibilities for the
expansion of real wealth. But they are thwarted, stunted, twisted,
deformed, by their subjugation to the value-form. The absurd and growing
contrast between what real wealth could be and the miserable life we
live in this world of value-wealth, is a material factor conditioning
conflicts and choices in society, pointing towards the need for a world
beyond value.

The �substantialist� view of value as the real inner substance of
products of labor, was a much better fit for the traditional Marxist
ideology. It agrees with its view of human consciousness being
unilaterally determined by outside conditions. But value is not an
outside condition, it just feels that way. Marx�s vision of value is not
acknowledged by traditional Marxism. If it were, it would have to
conclude that its idol was on its terms an �idealist.� For in Marx�s
theory, value, the very basis of capitalism, is a fetishized mode of
social being, one created by our action and perpetuated by our own
belief in its substantiality. It�s fetishism that makes us think that
it�s inside the products of our labor. Value is a rational, logical way
to measure and compare them, but this rationality hides the exploitative
social relation in which it is created. It is this social relation which
is endlessly reproduced through the expansion of the value-form.

**Understanding Marx**

6\. Still, traditional Marxism was not a break with the ideas of Marx.
Like everyone else, Marx was a child of his times. He had absorbed the
teleological conception of history, and the belief in mechanical laws
governing its progress. Sometimes, that led him to serious mistakes,
like his tendency to always find a side to support in wars (one side
always being more prone than the other to develop the productive forces,
thereby bringing socialism closer), regardless of their consequences for
the proletarians.

Marx took the side of the working class, not because he was a worker
himself, not because he believed that the working class is morally
superior to other classes, but because he realized that social
revolution requires a social force which finds in the material
conditions of its survival the inspiration and compulsion to do it. A
social force which at once has the potential power and the pressing need
to seek change. For him, that social force was the working class.
Because of the misery in which it is plunged, as well as because of its
socialized existence. Because of capitalism�s dependency on it for
value-creation, as well as because of its social productiveness, its
capacity to create real wealth, as a collective entity, the
�Gesamtarbeiter� or �collective worker�. Its struggle was the key to
unleashing that latent power.

Marx was heavily involved in it. He wanted to provide the proletariat
with a scientific theory that would guide it on the path to socialism
and assure it that victory was certain. That theory is what traditional
Marxism became and Marx contributed the main building blocks to it, with
works such as *The Holy Family*, the preface to *A Contribution to a
Critique of Political Economy*, and even the famous �Communist
Manifesto.�

As the years passed, his political involvement diminished because he was
increasingly absorbed by his theoretical work. Realizing the centrality
of the value-form to capitalism, he began to unravel it more and more.
That led to the writing of *the Grundrisse, Capital*, and other works in
which he dissected capitalism to the marrow, showing in great detail how
it functions as a system of value-accumulation, how it reproduces and
expands, how it builds up contradictions as it changes. Marx insisted
that capital is a moving contradiction or �a contradiction-in-process,�
based on its historically specific tendency to �reduce labour time to a
minimum,� to replace living with dead labor, technology and machinery,
while at the same time �positing labour as the sole measure and source
of wealth,� [(6)](#note-6) both acknowledging capital�s unstinting drive
to accumulate abstract value, and its insuperable dependence upon living
labor, the collective worker, for its very existence.

He revealed capital�s laws of motion and its immanent tendencies, the
causes of its successes and inevitable crises, and our need to end it.
This work has passed the test of time astonishingly well.

As his analysis of value deepened, he also became critical of other
aspects of what was becoming traditional Marxism. Of its determinism,
its claims of universal laws, its view of men simply obeying fixed laws
of history. Marx�s position had always been less schematist than what
traditional Marxism became, and over the years his understanding of the
complexity of history grew. But these critical insights did not
coalesce.

Meanwhile, the parties of the First International, while still singing
the praises of Marxism, were well on their way, especially after the
anarchists were excluded, to become what they later would be: mass
parties who, in de name of socialism or communism, manage or co-manage
the state, the accumulation of value. In 1875, when the German
Social-Democrats, with whom Marx and Engels were closely linked, were
about to adopt a program of nationalism, �fair wages�, �democratic
rights�, a �free state,� etc, Marx wrote a scathing critique, denouncing
its nationalism, its illusions in the state and claimed that the goal
should not be �fair wages� but the end of wage labor. In this �Critique
of the Gotha Program ,� he wrote his famous, one-sentence summary of the
communist program: � From each, according to his abilities, to each,
according his needs.� But he thought that was not realizable in the
short run and advocated an intermediate form, a �lower phase of
communism � in which the value-form would continue to exist. But his own
analysis implies that, as long as this is the case, capitalism�s basic
categories are intact. It has to be destroyed at a deeper level.

So while Marx refrained from drawing out all the implications if his
theory, his view was still too radical for his party. Marx realized his
waning influence by concluding his text with the bitter remark: �I have
spoken and have saved my soul.� But not much else, it seemed implied.
Except to a few, the text wasn�t even distributed at the congress where
said program was approved. It wasn�t published during his lifetime and
the same is unfortunately true for many other texts in which Marx
implicitly disagrees with Marxist ideology and shows that the value-form
itself creates and shapes capitalism, so that the latter cannot be ended
without abolishing the former.

Some of his unpublished writings were later edited by Engels and
Kautsky. In the case of the first volume of *Capital*, Marx censured
himself under pressure of others, supposedly to make the book more
accessible. It was only in the twentieth century (and to a large extent
in its final decades) that the whole of Marx�s �economic�
manuscripts,(the *�Grundrisse,� the �Immediate Results of the Process of
Production�* (originally a part of *Capital*, vol. 1) and others such as
the manuscripts for volumes II and III of *Capital*, were published.
This too helps explain the reductionist conceptualization of value by
traditional Marxism. For it was in those manuscripts that many of the
concepts crucial to an understanding of Marx�s method, and his analysis
of the trajectory or logic of capital, confirmed in the meantime by the
historical experience, became accessible.

**The Political Use of Traditional Marxist Ideology**

7\. The adoption of the Gotha-program was but one step in the process
which led to the integration of Social-Democracy into the management of
capitalism. The background to this process was a revolution within the
mode of production itself, a transition to what Marx called �the real
subsumption of labor.� We will come back to this in the next part of
this text. Here we want to point out that this revolution meant a vast
expansion of the value-form, both within the labor process and in
society in general. Tendentially, the value-form invades all social
realms, absorbs all civil institutions, integrates them into the
reproduction process of capitalist society. Tendentially, all social
institutions either become directly or indirectly functional to value
creation (and internalize the value-form, the capital-labor relation, in
the process) or disappear. Not because Machiavellian rulers decide this
but because of the value-form�s conquest of the whole of society,
integrating everything into its web of market relations, destroying
non-commodified relations and the relative autonomy which their social
expressions still had, when the domination of capital over labor and
society was �formal� and not yet �real�. Which means, when the virus of
the value-form had not yet spread everywhere. This gradual process, more
than theoretical shortcomings, explains why mass parties and
trade-unions which emerged from the working class were gradually
absorbed into capitalist society and then into the capitalist state.

Traditional Marxism was made instrumental to that process, which
fostered its dogmatization, ossification, ideologization. But the core
elements that made it possible to use traditional Marxism for this
transition were already there: the teleological, schematic, view of
history, and the inevitability of socialism, the equation of development
of the productive forces with progress, the view that value is the real
substance of social products and that socialism begins with the
redistribution of surplus value for the common good... Out of such
positions, Social-Democrats constructed a Marxist justification of their
reformist praxis. After all, if the development of the productive forces
inevitably leads to socialism, it�s not unreasonable to claim that their
gradual change can go hand in hand with a gradual transformation of
society. They pointed to the gains of workers struggles and the
electoral gains of Social-Democratic parties as proof that socialism can
be built within capitalism, one reform at the time. They claimed they
were conquering the state, using it for socialism; but in fact it was
the state that was conquering them, using them for capitalism.

The depth of their degeneration was revealed when capitalism engaged in
global war. The great majority of the so-called Marxists of the Second
International sided each with their own state, facilitating a bloodbath
that would cost about 50 million proletarian lives. As they became part
of the political structure of capitalism, the defense of the national
interest became their central concern. The nation was the theater of
their plans for a �socialist� redistribution of wealth, and the
capitalisation of what was their primary asset: their influence over the
working class. The �Communist Manifesto� proclaimed that workers have no
fatherland, but this internationalism was no longer reconcilable with
the praxis of Social Democracy. When the most vital interests of the
workers and those of the national capital clashed, the Social-Democratic
parties proved that they had become enemies of the working class,
obstacles to the perspective they supposedly embraced. [(7)](#note-7)

8\. A minority of Marxists resisted this degeneration. The most
influential among them was Lenin. Like Marx, he believed that the
experience of the proletarian struggle (in particular the Paris Commune
of 1871) had shown that the bourgeois state cannot be taken over, that
it must be overthrown. Like Marx, his was steadfast in his
internationalism, however unpopular this was on the eve of the war. His
leadership role in the initially successful revolution in Russia gave
him such authority that his brand of Marxism became synonymous with
�communism� throughout the world. What later became known as
�Marxism-Leninism� was a further degeneration of Lenin�s positions and
was even further removed from the thrust of Marx�s thought. Lenin was
very much a traditional Marxist, in the sense described above.

Schematist, dogmatic, deterministic, productivist. For him, the goal was
not the abolition of value but the use of surplus-value for the benefit
of the new society. In a speech in 1920 he stated that �communism is
soviet power plus the electrification of the whole country.� Notice that
the nation had already become his horizon. �Electrification� symbolized
for him the development of the productive forces, on the basis of
wage-labor. The motive of production remained the accumulation of value
through the extraction of surplus-value from the working class. Of
course, electrification, and the growth of production were necessary.
According to Lenin, that meant the value-form was necessary as well.
Whether that was true at that time and place is a matter of debate, but
it certainly excluded the possibility of communism. Whether the
state-capitalism he helped to construct was more or less efficient than
�private� capitalism in developing production is beside the point here.
It is true that there are real differences between the two systems. The
Leninist path meant a radical manipulation of the law of value, which
could accelerate things but also stifle them and created more room for
corruption, inefficiency and bureaucratic stupidity. We could discuss,
from the point of view of the development of the productive forces, the
advantages and disadvantages of each, which depend on different
circumstances of place and time. But the point is, that these are both
ways to manage the value-world. The Leninist version of traditional
Marxism kept us locked within the value-trap, with all of its disastrous
consequences.

As for the �soviet power� part in the Lenin-quote above: we saw what
became of that. �Soviet power� became Party power which became Central
Committee power which became Lenin power. For this too, Lenin based
himself on traditional Marxist ideology and its schematic conception of
consciousness. According to his theory, the working class, given its
brutal material conditions, its submission to the ruling class and
therefore also to its ideas, could not develop a revolutionary praxis
without the lever of Leninist leadership.

Apparently, characteristics associated with capitalism � stultifying
hard work, submission to authority, repression, militarization of labor,
etc., not only survived in �communism�, they became stronger. If the
workers struggle would have been more successful elsewhere, so that
Russia would not have been isolated, Lenin�s ideas might have evolved
differently, or they might have been counter-acted by those of others
within the Marxist movement. But as it was, Lenin became the leader of a
nation, a value-based economy, in which his party had taken over the
functions of the bourgeoisie in managing the extraction and accumulation
of surplus value. The goal of �socialism in one country� was already
present before Stalin made it official. While Lenin cannot be blamed for
all the sins committed in his name, there is a continuity between his
version of traditional Marxism and the horrors that �Marxism-Leninism�
later produced.

9\. The left communists rejected both the reformist and Leninist
interpretation of Marxism. They stood side by side with Lenin in
opposition to the war and supported wholeheartedly the revolution in
Russia, believing it could succeed, if it triumphed elsewhere as well.
When it didn�t, they had the courage to recognize that the revolution
had failed, that capitalism had survived in Russia, that �Marxism� had
become an ideology in the defense of capital.

But their denunciations of the positions of the Leninists as well as of
the Social-Democrats did not imply a rejection of traditional Marxism;
to the contrary, it was based upon it. They did not transcend it. For
them too, �Marxist doctrine� was the �proletarian science� that revealed
the sense of history, its inevitable course towards communism, driven by
the development of the productive forces. This is true for both the
Italian left and the German-Dutch left, which were the main theoretical
poles in the communist left. In the landmark early texts of the former,
mostly written by Amadeo Bordiga, such as �Rome Theses�, the schematism
and economic determinism are quite clear. The view of the German-Dutch
left was more nuanced and quite critical of vulgar materialism. But even
while chastising the cruder interpretations of the base-superstructure
determinism, Anton Pannekoek, perhaps the most influential
representative of this current, in texts such as The Workers Councils,
Historical Materialism, and Lenin as a Philosopher, affirmed his loyalty
to it. For him too, Marxism was the ��natural science of society. Hence
society, just as nature, is determined by natural laws �.�,
[(8)](#note-8) and communism was the inevitable result of the
development of the productive forces.

But the left communists argued that, if indeed the productive forces are
pushing society beyond capitalism, it is of the utmost importance that
the revolutionary class, the workers, struggle autonomously from capital
in all its expressions. This emphasis on the need for autonomous
proletarian struggle is what united them beyond their differences and
what separated them from the Social-Democrats and Leninists. We share
that conviction and identify with the fight the left communists waged
against the degeneration of the Second and Third Internationals. In
contrast to the latter, the theory of the left communists did not
degenerate. But it stagnated. We can understand why that happened: the
defensive position within which they found themselves in the context of
triumphant counter-revolution; their lack of access to the unpublished
texts of Marx that provide a key to going beyond traditional Marxism.
Less understandable is that even today, the left communists remain stuck
in it. There has not been any theoretical breakthrough made by the
various organizations that claim the heritage of the communist left.
Their theoretical work consists of cherry-picking empirical data to
confirm and update their dogmas but basically, they are theoretically
stuck in the early 20th century. That made them incapable of
understanding the actual trajectory of capital as we will see in the
next part of this text.

IP, in contrast, has broken with traditional Marxism. For us, Marxism is
not a science of society, the development of production is not
necessarily the measure of historical progress, not all of capitalism�s
development of the productive forces is progressive, the technology it
has developed is not neutral between different social formations,
communism is not historically inevitable, the base-superstructure model
does not accurately reflect the way that the entirety of events and
processes in capitalist society are causally linked, not all such events
are determined by specific economic causes, and communism does not mean
the redistribution of surplus value, but the end of the value-form.\
\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**NOTES**\
\
[1.]() To which must be added �diamat,� the basis of which is to be
found in Engels, in texts such as The Dialectics of Nature, and then
enshrined by Soviet (sic.) theorists under Lenin and Stalin. Histomat
with its transhistorical and teleological vision of history, its crude
economic determinism, and Diamat, with its parody of materialism
transposed to nature, and its purported �laws,� constitute theoretical
rejections of the subject/object dialectic, the historical specificity
of capitalism, and impose a set of dead abstractions on nature.\
\
[2.]() While, Engels, for example, sought to nuance the crude economic
determinism of that position, by acknowledging the role of other factors
that were overlooked in many texts for lack of time, place, and
occasion, to recognize them, that nuance was more often than not absent
from the texts of the traditional Marxism of the Second and Third
Internationals, an absence that reveals an inability to escape the
determinism within which �orthodox� Marxism was trapped.\
\
[3.]() While teleology in history, and its own roots in Hegel�s
philosophy of history, must be rejected, Hegel himself, in his Logic,
also acknowledges a �finite teleological-standpoint,� in contrast to a
transcendental one: goals posited by temporally specific human beings in
their social relations and productive mediations with the natural world
; human praxis, then, entails such a finite teleological-standpoint,
even as it excludes teleology in the historical process itself.\
\
[4.]() Karl Marx, *Capital*, Volume I (Penguin), p. 165.\
\
[5.]() See I. I. Rubin, *Essays on Marx�s Theory of Value* [6.]() Marx,
�Economic Manuscripts of 1857-58 \[The Grundrisse\] Karl Marx/Frederick
Engels, Collected Works, Volume 29 (New York, International Publishers,
1975), p. 91.\
\
[7.]() The Serbian Social Democrats, who voted against war credits and
the defense of the �fatherland,� and the Bolsheviks in Russia, who
rejected the defense of �Mother� Russia as war broke out, were signal
exceptions to this betrayal of internationalism.\
\
[8.]() Anton Pannekoek, *Lenin as Philosopher* (London: Merlin Press,
1975), p. 43.\
\
