+++
author = "Fischer"
date = "2015-12-16T18:41:41-07:00"
issue = ["IP060"]
title = "What is ISIS"
weight = 4

+++

Even before its spectacular emergence onto the world stage this year, the jihadist group known as the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS , and also as ISIL, or by its Arabic acronym Da’esh) was famed for its brutality in dealing with its enemies and enforcing its interpretation of Islamic law. But while it remained one of a series of regional jihadist groups operating in the region, most commentators were content to ignore it. Its success is seizing and holding significant territory in both Iraq and Syria, its savvy use of social-media and its ability to draw foreign recruits to its “Caliphate,” and its continued penchant for public brutality, most notably a fetish for beheadings, has led to a re-evaluation of the group.

### The History of ISIS

Despite its seemingly Athena-like appearance on the international level, ISIS has a much longer history. Like virtually all of the jihadist groups, the history of ISIS is a series of splits, mergers and bewildering name changes. The origins of ISIS can be traced to Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad (Group of Monotheism and Jihad) a jihadist group formed in 1999 by a Jordanian fighter Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who led the group until he was killed by a US bombing in Baqubah, Iraq in June 2006. 

In October 2004, Zarqawi declared his solidarity with Osama bin Laden’s al-Qaeda network, and his group became al-Qaeda’s affiliate in Iraq. The group changed its name to Tanzim Qaidat al-Jihad fi Bilad al-Rafidayn (Organization of Jihad’s Base in Mesopotamia), but was popularly known as al-Qaeda in Iraq (a name the group never used). Both prior to and during its affiliation Zaqawi’s group engaged in dramatic acts of violence including suicide bombings, public executions, and sectarian violence against Shia Muslims, which ultimately led to a reaction and temporary weakening of the group. In 2013, under the leadership of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who became leader after the 2010 death of Zarqawi’s successor Abu Abdullah al-Rashid al-Baghdadi, TQJBR merged with several smaller and similarly named organizations to become the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). 

In February of 2014, al-Qaeda took the unprecedented step of disavowing any connection with ISIS citing the brutality and intractability of ISIS. The step left al-Qaeda without an affiliate in Iraq, and its new section in Syria Jabhat al-Nusra (The Support Front for the People o f Al-Sham) quickly clashed with ISIS fighters. In the summer of 2014, with a quarter of Iraq under its control, ISIS proclaimed a caliphate and claimed authority over all Muslims worldwide, a point to which we will return. 

According to most sources, ISIS forces now control a quarter of Iraq and a third of Syria. It is estimated that ISIS’ revenues from the oil fields it controls run to millions of dollars daily. In addition, the commonly accepted figure for the number of fighters ISIS possesses is as high as 30,000. How has this come to pass? 

While it is tempting to ascribe the success of ISIS to funding from fundamentalist forces in Saudi Arabia and Qatar, ISIS has not only pulled together jihadists in Iraq, but attracted fighters from across the globe. While the majority of ISIS fighters are either of Iraqi or Syrian origins, significant numbers are foreign jihadists including over a thousand from nearby Turkey. The border between Turkey and Syria has long been porous and ISIS militants have freely operated recruitment centres within poorer districts in Turkish cities. The Hacibayram neighbourhood in Ankara’s tourist district has reportedly seen over a hundred of its residents go to fight for ISIS. With high unemployment and little future, ISIS has been able to attract youth disenchanted by moderate Islamic regimes, now attracted to a more exciting life. According to a report in the New York Times ISIS fighters receive up to $150 a day and other needs being free. For youth from an impoverished background, the glamour of waging jihad for high wages must be a significant lure. 

After initial angry denials to accusations of turning a blind eye to the growth of ISIS, Turkey softened its position and allowed the U.S. to use Turkish military bases near the Syrian border to help defend the Kurdish town of Kobani. Turkey’s actions regarding ISIS appear to have been twofold. First it was hoped that ISIS fighters would cause headaches for the Assad regime in Syria with whom Turkey is in a bitter conflict. Second, like ISIS, Turkey has no love for the Kurds and also seems to care little for Syrian Kurds. Of late Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan has even claimed that ISIS and the Kurdistan Workers Party are twin evils, and a greater enemy is the Syrian dictator Assad. 

The Assad regime too has attempted to use ISIS for its own purpose. Spokesmen for the Free Syrian Army have suggested that part of Assad’s strategy has been to pose the alternative in Syria as between his government and ISIS, calculating that the West and the Arab regimes would see him as the lesser evil. 

### What Next?

One of the distinctive features of capitalism throughout its history has been the continued disruption of community. In opposition to this, Islam has often proclaimed a utopian community of believers, the Umma. To become a part of that community, you need only become a Muslim. In a way the (re)creation of such a community is what ISIS is attempting to do albeit in a brutal and tyrannical fashion. According to its own ideology, ISIS is a caliphate, an Islamic government under sharia law led by a descendant of Mohammad. (That there seems to be little evidence that ISIS leader al-Baghdadi is such a descendant, does not matter.) ISIS therefore seeks to extend its base throughout the region for its community of believers. For those who choose not to accept ISIS’ interpretation, ISIS has two options: leave or die.

But this is not the recreation of a (mythical) community. It is a further example of capitalism as it sinks deeper into crisis, producing ever more barbaric and genocidal responses. This is not about religion, about Sunni or Shia. If there is an ideology, it is nationalism, just as it is in the conflict between Hamas and Israel. Nationalism is the ideological and cultural foundation of capitalism, a nationalism that is brutally xenophobic, whether it’s the nationalism of “oppressed peoples” or their oppressors. The result will always be mass murder; the expulsion of the “other” from their homes and lands, and the rule of the gun, the F-16, or poison gas. This is the case whether the nationalism is secular (Ba’athism in Iraq or Syria, Nasserism in Egypt, a half century ago), or religious, as is increasingly the case today in the Islamic world.

Currently ISIS seems to have galvanized significant sections of world opinion against it, even though its atrocities are significantly less than those committed in Dafur, Rwanda or half a dozen other examples of ethnic cleansing. The U.S. and its allies which earlier employed such rebels as a stick against the Assad regime in Syria have turned against them, but whether the Obama administration has the inclination to commit to a full scale ground war, as some in the U.S. have argued, remains to be seen. The US and its coalition of Europeans and moderate and not-so-moderate Arab and Islamic states, including Iran, may blunt the edge of ISIS or even reduce it to a guerrilla force as they did with the Taliban, but they will not have an effect on the social conditions which produce such barbarism with increasing frequency. 

#### Fischer

*November 2014*