+++
author = "Sander"
date = "2015-12-16T18:44:07-07:00"
issue = ["IP060"]
title = "A Debate on Crisis Theory"
weight = 10

+++

*This text discusses two questions, raised by Michael Heinrich in his recent book and articles: does capitalism really imply a “law of the tendential fall of the rate of profit” or is that ‘law’ a mistake which Marx later abandoned? (part 1) and: did Marx have a theory of capitalist collapse and if so, is it a valid framework to understand the reality of today? (part 2).*

The rate of profit according to Esteban Maito’s calculations – see article on Thomas Piketty 

### Part 1: A ‘law’ or a mistake?

The chapters on Crisis Theory in Michael Heinrich’s “Introduction to the three volumes of Karl Marx’s Capital” are not the most interesting parts of the book, but they are, so far, the most controversial ones. Heinrich expanded on them in an article in the Monthly Review which provoked several replies from other Marxist thinkers. [^27] The tone of these replies is often indignant, even angry, because Heinrich dares to question what they consider to be the alpha and omega of Marx’s analysis of the roots of capitalist crisis: the law of the tendential fall of the rate of profit *(‘LTFRP’ from now on).*

The law is not difficult to grasp if you’re familiar with the basics of Marx’s value-theory. Since the capitalist who replaces labor power by technology to increase productivity produces more cheaply than his competitors and thereby reaps an extra-profit, and since competition forces all capitalists to follow suit, production becomes more and more dependent on mechanical and automated processes, and the role of living labor in it consequently declines. Since surplus value, the source of profit , is but a part of living labor, it must decline with it. The unpaid part "will likewise decrease, however much it may have grown compared to the paid portion." *(Marx, Capital 3. p.226. International Publishers)*

Part III of Capital, vol.3 in which Marx explains this, is rather short. A first chapter explains the law as such, a second gives a summary of the most important counter-acting factors which can arrest or even reverse the law for some time, a third one, on the internal contradictions of the law, goes beyond the subject and highlights other aspects of capitalist crisis. The style is telegraphic at times. A lot is left unpacked. This is one of the places in Capital where you can see most clearly that the author died too soon. I agree with Heinrich that Marx never got around to formulating a complete crisis theory, a view his critics vehemently deny. That he didn’t wasn’t because he neglected the subject; on the contrary, for obvious reasons, he was very interested in it. He wrote about it time and again, and from different vantage points, not always the LTFRP. But he never pulled the different strands together in one comprehensive analysis.

That doesn’t necessarily mean that he had doubts as to the validity of the LTFRP. The arguments that Heinrich advances for this hypothesis are rather thin. Kliman and co give strong counter-arguments. But enough exegesis. Whether Marx had doubts about it or not has no bearing whatsoever on the question whether the LTFRP is real or not.

The profit[^28] is the value of what is produced minus the costs of production. The rate of profit thus expresses how much surplus value s has been created compared to how much value is spent on constant capital c (infrastructure, technology, raw materials) and variable capital v (wages). Or: s/c+v. What happens to this rate when the organic composition of capital – the ratio c/v - increases, as is the general tendency in capitalism, since its transition to real domination began? We can illustrate this, as Heinrich reminds us, by dividing both denominator and numerator by v, which gives s/v / c/v+1. What this shows is that the rate of profit depends on two conflicting factors: on the one hand the increase of the rate of surplus value s/v (the part of the working day that goes to the capitalist versus the part that goes to the worker) and on the other the rate of increase of the organic composition c/v (we can ignore the constant +1). Marx claims the latter factor is tendentially stronger than the former. He gives an example in which 24 workers, each of them doing 2 hours surplus labor per day (in sum 48 hours of surplus labor per day), are, as a result of the rise of c/v, replaced by only 2 workers. No matter how much s/v has risen, those two workers obviously cannot provide 48 hours of surplus labor per day, so the rate of profit falls.

#### Heinrich’s argument against the LTFRP

Not necessarily, says Heinrich. The amount of profit falls, but if the value of the capital (c+v) needed to produce it has fallen as well, the rate of profit, s/c+v, could stay the same or even rise. In his reply to his critics he illustrates this by expanding Marx’s example:

> “Let us put the example in the framework of organic composition and assume that the working day lasts 12 hours and that in each working hour one value unit is produced. When in the first case 24 workers deliver 2 hours surplus labour each, then 10 hours of the working day are paid, and in sum the 24 workers deliver a total surplus value of 24 x 2 = 48 and the variable capital is 24 x 10 = 240. Let us assume the constant capital is 60. Then the organic composition c/v is 60/240 = 25% and the profit rate is 48/(60+240) = 16%.

> Now let us assume productivity has risen and only 2 workers are necessary, and since a fall in the value of labor power is analogous to a rise in productivity, let us assume each worker is now providing 10 hours of surplus labour. The surplus value has decreased to 2 x 10 = 20 (instead of 48). When the working day still lasts 12 hours then only two hours are paid, the variable capital is 2 x 2 = 4 (instead of 240). Let us assume an increase in constant capital. For purposes of illustration let us say that constant capital has increased from 60 to 96, and then we find that the organic composition has risen enormously, from 25% to 96/4 = 2400%. However the profit rate did not fall, it has risen to 20/(96+4) = 20% (instead of 16%). Only when constant capital, in this illustration, is bigger than 121 and therefore that the organic composition is *bigger than 121/4 = 3025%*, then and only then the profit rate will start to fall.” 

> *(Heinrich answers critics, op.cit)*

Heinrich sees no reason why the rate of increase of c/v should outpace the rate of increase of s/v, since they are bound together: the capitalist increases c/v to raise productivity and it is this greater productivity which lowers the value of labor power v and thus increases s/v. He writes: “We cannot escape the problem that capitalist development of productivity has two contradictory effects on the profit rate. Maintaining the LTFRP presupposes that one can give reasons for the claim that in the long run the effect of rising c/v must prevail over the effect of rising s/v.”

Heinrich’s thesis is not a new one. Many before him, Marxists (such as Rosa Luxemburg in her ‘Antikritik’) as well as non-Marxists, have argued that the LTFRP is invalid because of the declining value of the components of production c and v. In an earlier text I have tried to show why this is incorrect [^29]. Now let’s see if this debate throws new light on the question.

Before delving into in this debate, let me confess that I’m skipping several parts of it. Such as the skirmishes with algebraic formulas, which are quite unnecessary to grasp the issue. Or the question how the LTFRP compares to the law of gravity (I’m not kidding). I also skip the debate on Marx’s doubts on the question *of* whether the LTFRP predicts or only explains, on how to interpret the empirical data and what they tell us about the future, and on whether Marx saw the rise of s/v as part of the law or as part of the counter-tendencies. Regardless how you answer that last question, it has to be demonstrated why in the long run the rise of s/v cannot compensate for the continuously shrinking role of living labor in production.

#### A red herring

To clear the table, I will first address a critique of Heinrich’s position which at first sight seemed plausible to me but less so upon reflection. Kliman and co charge that his thesis implies, not an accumulation of capital, but its dis-accumulation. That would be a serious mistake indeed, since the compulsion to accumulate is assumed; without it, not only can’t we imagine a LTFRP, but neither capitalism itself. Heinrich seems to entertain the implausible possibility of a capitalism continuously shrinking in value, while maintaining a healthy rate of profit. Indeed, in the example he gives, the value of production (c+v+s) in the first cycle is 348, in the second only 120. Where did almost 2/3 of the value go? It’s hard to see any connection between this example and the actual accumulation process. According to Kliman and co, “*Heinrich presumes and has to presume the dis-accumulation of capital* \[and\] thus “refutes” the conclusion of Marx’s argument by presuming the absence of one of its key premises”. It’s true that Heinrich presumes it but does he “have to presume” it? He presumes it only because he sticks to the example of Marx (24 workers replaced by 2 workers). He assumes that less constant capital (in value) would be needed to employ the 2 workers than the 24 workers. That’s not an unreasonable assumption. It does not necessarily imply a dis-accumulation, it implies that more capital becomes available for productive investment elsewhere. If we take it as a representation of the accumulation process as a whole, Heinrich’s example makes no sense, but it’s not meant that way. Clearly the transition from cycle one (in which c+v+s=60+ 240+ 48) to cycle two (96+4+20) is impossible. The value has to return into the production process, to continue valorization (or else risk devalorization). But, barring obstacles outside the production process itself, there is no reason why it can’t. Cycle two then becomes c+v+s= 309, 4 + 14,6 + 73. Here we have accounted for all of the value of cycle one, assuming that half of s went to unproductive consumption and half was re-invested in production. We have maintained the same organic composition c/v as Heinrich. The rate of profit is 22.5 %, rising even higher than in his example. But there is accumulation. Thus, the charge that Heinrich’s position implies dis-accumulation seems a red herring. [^30]

But these figures are arbitrary. As Heinrich concedes, if the organic composition c/v would rise faster in his example, or if the rate of surplus value would not have jumped quite that high, the rate of profit would fall. The question he poses, is whether there *is* a difference between the rate by which the value of wages as part of the total value of production shrinks (c/v) and the rate by which the workers are exploited (s/v) ? Are they facing different limits? Or are they, as Heinrich believes, pushed forward together by the same productivity-growth, so that no dominant tendency emerges?

#### The ceiling of exploitation

The answer is that there is indeed a difference. There is no ceiling to the rise of the organic composition, except the limits to knowledge and the limits to its application imposed by the social conditions of the moment. There is no theoretical limit to the degree in which living labor can be reduced in production. while for surplus-value, "its barrier always remains the relation between the fractional part of the day which expresses necessary labor and the entire working day. It can only move within those boundaries." *(Marx, Grundrisse, p. 340, Penguin ed)*

For Carchedi and Roberts that means that “there is a biological, but above all, a socially class-determined insuperable limit to the extension of the working day”. Heinrich does not deny this but argues that lengthening the working day is not the only way to increase s/v. He’s right. Carchedi and Roberts seem to think that there is only absolute surplus value extraction. But there is also relative surplus value, obtained as a result of the shortening of the paid part of the working day, because of the fall in value of what workers buy with their wages: a result, therefore, of rising productivity. “There is no visible limit for the rise of s/v as long as productivity can be increased,” according to Heinrich. *(Heinrich answers critics)*

Let’s be clear on the effect of rising productivity on surplus value. When a capitalist raises the productivity of his company by increasing its organic composition, that doesn’t mean that the rate of surplus value s/v increases as well. If he is innovative, he obtains an extra-profit in the phase of circulation because of his superior competitive position, but he has not extracted more surplus value. Quite the contrary, if the number of workers he employs has diminished (as in Marx’s and Heinrich’s illustration), the direct result of his investment is a decline of s, even though its value is spread over many more commodities. What raises s/v for him is not his own action but the declining value of v, of what workers buy with their wages, as a result, not of the productivity of his own company, but of the productivity of the production of consumer goods for the working class in general. As Marx wrote, “when an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by increasing the productivity of labour, he by no means necessarily aims to reduce the value of labour-power and shorten necessary labour-time in proportion to this. But he contributes towards increasing the general rate of surplus-value only in so far as he ultimately contributes to this result.” *(Capital, Vol 1, p.433)*. Rising productivity in the production of constant capital c does not raise the general rate of surplus value (or only indirectly, by leading to rising productivity in the production of consumer goods).

So Heinrich’s claim that there is no limit to the rise of s/v as long as productivity can be increased, really means that s/v can always rise, as long as the use values the workers need can be produced with less labor time. That is true but the rise will be increasingly incremental and ineffective as a counterforce. His own example illustrates this. In it, the number of workers (working 12 hours a day) falls from 24 to 2. He makes this work for capitalism by assuming a decrease in value of constant capital c and an increase of the rate of exploitation: instead of 2 hours, they now perform 10 hours per day for free for capital. One wonders how that would work in the next cycle. It’s clear that the pace of increase of s/v could not be maintained. And with every further increase of the organic composition, its increase inevitably would decline. s/v could grow from 10/2 to 11/1 to 11,5/0.5 to 11/9/0,1 to 11,99/0,01 but it could never rise above 12, the total value of the labor power (s+v) expended in production. That is the ceiling Heinrich doesn’t seem to see. [^31]

It can be misleading to look at c/v and s/v in splendid mathematical isolation, both seemingly capable of rising ad infinitum as long as productivity can be increased. It may be clarifying to compare instead the growth-potential of c/v+s and s/v+s (by adding s to each numerator). The first is the value of dead labor compared to the value of the total living labor in production (as opposed to only paid labor time in c/v). The second is the value of the unpaid living labor compared to the value of the total living labor. It is clear that the second can never become greater than 1, while for the first, such a ceiling does not exist.

#### Additional arguments on the limits of the rate of surplus value

That is the essential point. Additional arguments can be made to point out that, contrary to what Heinrich affirms, there is indeed a difference in the rate of growth of c/v and s/v. One is that the rise of the organic composition tends to be faster in (what Marx called) Department I, the production of constant capital, than in Department II, the production of consumer goods. The incentive is the same but because of their characteristics as use values, the first is more prone to technification than the second. The very nature of the commodities bought with wages (including housing, education, health care, services) limits the increase of c/v in their production. It’s easier to automate a steel factory than a restaurant. So the lower than average c/v in Dep. II limits the decline of the value of v and thus the increase of s/v. Secondly the decline of v, the value of labor power, is counteracted by the expansion of its very definition which is social. To produce the goods which defined the value of labor power in early capitalism (mainly food) would require only a very small fraction of the labor time needed to produce the goods which define the value of labor power today. That is, on the one hand, the result of the fact that, the more complex and technified society becomes, the more complex also the conditions of reproduction of the working class (so that, for instance, a car changes from being a luxury item for members of the possessing class to a necessity for many workers); and, on the other, the fact that the value of labor power has what Marx called “a moral component”, it is influenced by what society considers to be necessary means of living, it is influenced by the self-awareness of the working class and the struggle it engenders. The recent history of China is a good example of how both influences lead to an expansion of what defines, in use values, the commodity labor power. This does not imply that the productivity-driven rise of s/v is neutralized, but it does put a brake on s/v+s, while not affecting c/v+s.

There are many issues regarding the LTFRP that aren’t discussed here, such as the counteracting influences Marx analyzes in chapter 14 of Cap.3, which are strangely absent in this debate, though not in the history of capitalism. Also, the cyclical character of the profit-rate: the LTFRP leads to crisis but crisis is its antidote, it devalorizes both c and v and thereby rekindles the rate of profit. Also, there’s the question of whether, besides causing cyclical crises, the TFRP becomes worse over time, making the crises deeper and the recoveries weaker. And whether that leads to a point where further accumulation is impeded to such an extent that the global capitalist economy collapses. The latter claim is hard to sustain on the base of the LTFRP alone. While a fall of the general rate of profit leads to dis-accumulation, overproduction, unemployment, in short, to crisis, it is the weakest competitors and the working class who suffer and the stronger capitals which benefit from its results: the declining value of c and v raises their rate of profit. So the LTFRP explains why cyclical crises are inevitable, but not why crisis can lead to a global breakdown.

### Part 2: Is capitalism facing a global economic breakdown?

But there’s more to Marx’s view on the roots of the capitalist crisis than the LTFRP. According to Heinrich, Marx’s “most general formulation of capitalism’s tendency to crisis is completely independent of the “law of the tendential fall in the rate of profit”. He points to the contradiction Marx saw between the conditions for the production of surplus value and the conditions for its realization; between capitalism’s tendency to develop the productive forces as much as it can in order to extract as much s as possible and the limit which the capitalist relations of production impose on the expansion of its market. In the same book in which he explained the LTFRP, Marx wrote that "the ultimate reason for all real crises always remains the poverty and restricted consumption of the masses, in face of the drive of capitalist production to develop the productive forces as though only the absolute consuming power of society constituted their limit." *(Capital, Vol. 3, p 484)*

#### America’s bright future

So the critique of Kliman and co that “Heinrich doesn’t put forward an alternative crisis theory of his own,” is not entirely correct. He has one, albeit a sketchy one. But it’s nothing new. We’re back in the ‘classic’ Marxist debate between those who see the LTFRP as the sole cause of crisis and those who claim that the fundamental problem is the market-contradiction. This debate even predates Marx, with Ricardo who assumed that the realization of capital is completed in the phase of production and Sismondi who saw only a lack of consumers. It has not developed all that much since. Both camps insist on the ‘independence’ of ‘their’ cause. For the first, it is situated in the phase of production, for the second, in the phase of circulation. For the first, overproduction is a mere consequence of the fall of the rate of profit, for the second, it’s the other way around.

But Marx saw neither one as independent from the other; instead he stressed their mutual determination: “Production determines the market, as well as the market determines production" *(Capital, Vol. 3. p 191)* and the capitalist mode of production “comes to a standstill at a point fixed by the production AND realization of profit” *(ibid. p.258, my emphasis).*

The relation between the LTFRP and the market contradiction is not simply that one is cause and the other consequence. From the passage quoted earlier on “the ultimate reason for crises” one could conclude that Marx believed that capitalism could overcome its crises by increasing the consumption of the masses. But he sharply criticized that position[^32] (which is the basis of the ideology of the capitalist left). Why did he, if he saw “the poverty of the masses” as “the ultimate reason for all real crises”? Because this passage follows the part in which he explains the LTFRP, which therefore is assumed. Otherwise, higher wages would indeed be an antidote to the crisis, while in Marx’s view, the opposite is true. So yes, we must look at the contradiction between the conditions for the production of profit and the conditions for its realization. But the LTFRP is an intrinsic part of the former. Contrary to what Heinrich claims, the contradiction is not “completely independent” from it. It “has to be grasped more intrinsically than merely as the indifferent, seemingly reciprocally independent appearance of the individual moments of the process.” *(Grundrisse, p.415.)*

Their unity is capital, the reproduction of society through the accumulation of value and vice versa. What breaks this unity? That is the question crisis theory must answer.

If Marx would have gotten around to writing a comprehensive analysis of capitalist crisis, as he had planned to do, I believe he would have started the same way he began Capital: with the value-form and the split nature of the social form of wealth in capitalism, the commodity. 

The commodity is both value and a use-value. Their unity is crucial: it cannot be one without the other. Capital’s sole purpose is the production of value (more specifically: of surplus value), but as much as the capitalist may wish to be able to produce “pure value”, the commodity must have the concrete form of a use-value that fits a demand generated by the concrete needs of the reproduction process of capitalist society (or be a luxury-item for the rich).

The commodity cannot be value with no use-value, nor a use-value with no value. Their unity is what defines the commodity, is what defines capitalism. To maintain it, they must develop together, in the same direction.

Marx observed (and predicted) a gradual yet fundamental shift in the historical trajectory of capital, from ‘formal’ to ‘real subsumption of labor’, or from formal to real domination of capital. This entails that technology replaces manual labor at the center of the production process, that capital swallows the whole of civil society, instead of merely controlling it, and that productivity-growth becomes the main instrument for the capitalist in the hunt for profit. As we explained elsewhere,[^33] this transition implies an historical tendency to unhinge value and use-value, to shatter their unity. This impacts all the transformations value has to go through in order to continue its accumulation process: in the production of value by its slowing growth (the LTFRP), in the realization of value by the exponential growth of use-values, and in the transformation of money back into productive capital by both, resulting in the increasing difficulty “to maintain the value that is already realized, as value,” as Marx put it.

This manifests itself in the phase of production in a lack of profit and in the phase of circulation in a lack of demand and in the financial sphere in over-accumulation and bubble-formation, but the source is the same: the conceptualization of wealth as value, which originally fitted capitalism perfectly but which becomes increasingly absurd in the world capitalism has created.

Marx wrote an outline for such a comprehensive crisis-theory in a section of *“Grundrisse”*, known as the “Fragment on Machines” (see below), in which neither the LTFRP nor the market-contradiction is treated as an independent factor but both, and other crisis manifestations, are linked at a deeper level, in the value-form itself. It shows that he believed that capitalism, apart from having to suffer cyclical crises, also contains an historical tendency to economic breakdown.

It shows that he believed that capitalism, apart from having to suffer cyclical crises, also contains an historical tendency to economic breakdown.

#### A theory of collapse

Heinrich criticizes the “Fragment on Machines”. He claims that it was the only time Marx outlined a theory of capitalist economic collapse and that he abandoned it later (though he offers no convincing proof for that). Heinrich may have a (vague) crisis theory but he certainly has no collapse theory. Indeed, he rejects the possibility of a collapse offhand. His arguments are sparse. His main objection is that collapse theories “always had an excusatory function: regardless of how bad contemporary defeats were, the opponent’s end was a certainty”. That’s probably true but it says nothing *about* whether these theories were right or wrong. I will come back to this issue at the end of this article. But let’s first take a look at what Marx wrote and what Heinrich finds objectionable. We think it’s an important text. Allow me to quote most of it:

> “To the degree that large industry develops, the creation of real wealth comes to depend less on labour time and on the amount of labour employed than on the power of the agencies set in motion during labour time, whose ‘powerful effectiveness’ is itself in turn out of all proportion to the direct labour time spent on their production, but depends rather on the general state of science and on the progress of technology, or the application of this science to production.(...) Labour no longer appears so much to be included within the production process; rather, the human being comes to relate more as watchman and regulator to the production process itself (..)

> He steps to the side of the production process instead of being its chief actor. In this transformation, it is neither the direct human labour he himself performs, nor the time during which he works, but rather the appropriation of his own general productive power, his understanding of nature and his mastery over it by virtue of his presence as a social body – it is, in a word, the development of the social individual which appears as the great foundation-stone of production and of wealth. The *theft of alien labour time, on which the present wealth is based, *appears a miserable foundation in face of this new one, created by large-scale industry itself. As soon as labour in the direct form has ceased to be the great well-spring of wealth, labour time ceases and must cease to be its measure, and hence exchange value \[must cease to be the measure\] of use value.

> The *surplus labour of the mass *has ceased to be the condition for the development of general wealth, just as the *non-labour of the few, *for the development of the general powers of the human head. With that, production based on exchange value breaks down (..) Capital itself is the moving contradiction, \[in\] that it presses to reduce labour time to a minimum, while it posits labour time, on the other side, as sole measure and source of wealth (..)

>On the one side, it calls to life all the powers of science and of nature, as of social combination and of social intercourse, in order to make the creation of wealth independent (relatively) of the labour time employed on it. On the other side, it wants to use labour time as the measuring rod for the giant social forces thereby created, and to confine them within the limits required to maintain the already created value as value.”

> *(Grundrisse, p.705-706 )*

According to Heinrich, Marx here confuses abstract and concrete labor. “The social substance of wealth or value in capitalism is abstract labor, whereby it does not matter whether this abstract labor can be traced back to labor-power expended in the process of production, or to the transfer of value of used means of production. If abstract labor remains the substance of value, then it is not clear why labor time can no longer be its intrinsic measure, and it’s not clear why “production based on exchange value” should necessarily collapse.” *(Heinrich: Crisis theory, op.cit)*

But he misses the point. Rather than confusing abstract and concrete labor, or value and use-values, Marx argues that the very development of capitalist production has a contradictory effect on them; that it drives them apart while they need to stay connected. To this purpose, he introduces the category "real wealth," (or ‘general wealth’), and contrasts it with “the present wealth” (value). They must remain connected, the latter measures the former. The question Marx raises is: if the source of real wealth is no longer what the law of value measures (labor time), how can value continue to be its measuring rod?

His analysis situates the roots of capitalism’s crisis in its very foundation: the commodity form. The growing disjunction between its two sides makes the very conceptualization of wealth as value, which is the *basis* of capitalism, dysfunctional. All the crisis manifestations follow from this.

In the ‘Fragment on Machines’ Marx predicts, rather than merely explaining. He saw a long term trend leading up to conditions which are no longer those that gave rise to the logic of capital and are not compatible with it. Because it is a long term trend, the contradiction he points to is more recognizable today than it could have been in his own times.

In the world to which capitalism is evolving, according to Marx, the source of real wealth is no longer living labor. This implies that automation becomes the norm. The real source of wealth now is knowledge, information, science and its productive application by “the social individual”. This was not the reality of his days but today we’re moving very fast in that direction.

Let’s take the example of software, purely digital goods that play an ever greater role in our daily lives and in the production process. There is, of course still quite a bit of living labor required to develop new software but the value of a commodity is not the abstract labor that went into the development of its prototype, but the abstract labor needed for its reproduction. How much of it is needed to reproduce software? As much as it takes to put it on the web. The rest, the consumer does himself, just by clicking on “Download”. So what is the value of this commodity? Despite its use-value, it has very little value and therefore even less surplus value. How then can it be profitable? How can it still be a commodity? Indeed, a substantial number of digital goods aren’t anymore, since they are shared instead of sold and bought. And yet many software-producing companies are doing well, enjoying a better than average rate of profit.

But there’s no correlation anymore between the price of these commodities and their value. The level of demand is the only limit for the former. The companies have a monopoly over their product. The privatization of knowledge (through a vast expansion of patents and copyrights, both in number and duration), enforced by the state, shields them from direct competition.[^34]

Software companies are but an extreme example of a general trend. In all sectors, capital is striving for monopolistic positions which seemingly shelter it from the law of value. The increasing concentration of capital also serves this purpose[^35].

But is this a solution to the contradiction which according to Marx would lead to a breakdown of capitalism? It is a temporary solution for the most advanced capitals. They obtain prices for their commodities far above their value. But value is still the framework. Their profits are still surplus value. But it’s not, for the most part, surplus value they extracted themselves. It’s paid by their customers. It’s a tax, on the overall economy, to support the rate of profit of the most developed capitals; it’s a burden rather than an escape.

What leads capitalism to breakdown is not only that “the creation of wealth” \[becomes\] “independent (relatively) of the labour time employed on it”, that “labour no longer appears so much to be included within the production process”, so that the rate of profit must fall. It’s also that the “powerful effectiveness” of human knowledge overwhelms the demand for use values that can be productively consumed. The use-values have to go through the narrowing value-hoop. Of course, unproductive consumption can be endlessly expanded, but it kills value, while capitalism is forced to accumulate, to transform value into more value. So the contradiction within the commodity also leads to a growing imbalance between productive capacity and productive demand and to the impossibility of confining “the giant social forces thereby created within the limits required to maintain the already created value as value”. Here Marx points to the instability of value. “The already created value” does not stay value by definition. Value must valorize to avoid devalorization. If it can’t by investing in production, it over-accumulates as financial capital. There too, the contradiction between value and use-value becomes apparent. Ever more value is stored in the financial hoard but the use-value of money is determined by the demand for it to circulate other commodities and to serve as latent capital, setting in motion production over a longer term. The commodity money thus is overproduced and must come crashing down. It is the devalorization of the financial hoard that brings all the crisis tendencies together and makes the breakdown general. The crisis is existential: with the collapse of the ability to maintain the already created value as value in money, capitalist society loses its rudder and its purpose.

There are other aspects of crisis flowing from the contradiction within the commodity which Marx does not mention in the ‘Fragment’. A tendential expulsion of living labor from production implies that an ever greater number of workers become superfluous for capital. We see this happen today at an accelerating pace, not just because of crisis but because of the transformation of the mode of production Marx described in the “Fragment.” The billions of people that cannot be profitably employed become a heavy burden on capital. Poverty is expensive: the costs of their (even if minimal) survival, of their containment (including prisons and armies and police forces which increasingly look and act like armies), the costs of containing the effects of poverty in a globalized world, the epidemics and so on, force capitalism to spend an ever greater quantity of value unproductively, which drags down the profit-rate. The solution that becomes logical, from the point of view of capital, is to get rid of this burden, to cause a massive destruction of human life. But *just as* value pretends to be real wealth, capitalism pretends to serve the reproduction of the whole of humanity. Its deepening crisis tends to tear this pretention to shreds. Yet it needs its ideological mask and is therefore not entirely free to do what it wants. The burden of unproductive costs, despite all efforts to cut it, continues to be a factor aggravating capitalism’s tendential breakdown.

There is another consequence of the transformation Marx describes in the “Fragment” that he could not foresee: the devastating ecological crisis that we witness today. Here too, we see the contradiction between capitalist wealth (value) and real wealth; the destruction of the latter in order to make the former grow. The main immediate economic effect of this are the rising costs of containing the effects of climate change and the rape of the earth which further depress the general rate of profit, without addressing their worsening cause.

The above paragraphs are not meant as a complete exposition of crisis theory: there are other aspects to it, and most importantly, we have been silent on the role of counter-tendencies without which capitalism’s history would be very different (for a more comprehensive overview, see endnote vii). What I tried to show was that the logic of capitalism leads, besides its cyclical crises, in the long term indeed to an economic collapse, and that the framework that Marx unfolded in the “Fragment on Machines” is indeed a correct one to understand this, contrary to what Heinrich claims.

In it Marx writes, “As soon as labour in the direct form has ceased to be the great well-spring of wealth, labour time ceases and must cease to be its measure, and hence exchange value \[must cease to be the measure\] of use value” – does that mean that he believed that capitalism would just crumble and society would fall like a ripe apple into the proletariat’s lap? Was he certain capitalism would end because it would defeat itself? It is possible that when he wrote *Grundrisse*, (1858) he still held on to a deterministic, schematic view of history and that he later abandoned it, as Heinrich asserts. But the framework of the “Fragment” remains valid without the assumption that an economic breakdown automatically leads to the disappearance of capitalism. Economic collapse does not equal political collapse. Instead of leading to revolution, it can lead to fascism and war. Massive devalorization and outright destruction of value can reset the conditions for value-accumulation. Still, the breakdown of the economy makes the contrast between value and real wealth, between the needs of capital and the needs of the collective worker, between the survival of the value-form and the survival of humankind starkly visible. It creates a great urgency, a collective need to fight to survive. While this does not guarantee a revolution, it’s hard to imagine a revolution without it.

Indeed, “labor time must cease to be the measure of wealth” (the survival of our species requires it) but this cannot happen without revolution. And it’s only a revolution if indeed it makes labor time cease to be the measure; if in the struggle, it abolishes wages, money and market-production and reinvents human relations, to each other and to nature.

Sander